AI #2084: Augment AGENTS.md to handle for false positives in AI-assisted PR reviews (#2172)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: AGENTS.md

* Use BCP-14 keywords: MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, MAY (all uppercase).
* DO NOT use: "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "OPTIONAL"

> * **Location:** Capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside "Requirements" unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").

Author: Per @ijurica:

```suggestion
* **Location:** In spec content, capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside "Requirements" unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").
```

> * **Location:** In spec content, capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside "Requirements" unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").

Reviewer: @shawnalpay should we clarify that we are talking about the "Requirements" section?

```suggestion
* **Location:** In spec content, capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside the "Requirements" sections unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").
```

Author: Sure.  With one tweak..
```suggestion
* **Location:** In spec content, capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside "Requirements" sections unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").
```

> * **Location:** Normative keywords MUST NOT appear outside of the "Requirements" header. They MAY appear in non-normative sections only if explicitly enclosed in quotation marks in reference to an existing statement.

Author: Let's discuss.  Gemini keeps getting tripped up on this.  We either need to embrace an exception, or we need to firmly disallow quoting normative text in places like the Appendix.

Reviewer 2: "Use a better model"? 🙃 Kidding... I'm good with this. Have you tested it to see if it works? I could imagine some more drastic measures...

Author: I haven't tested it, but I'm sure more corner cases will arise, so I'm okay with iterating.  Alternatively, I'm also down to not make this change and strictly enforce what we have, and prevent folks from quoting normative requirements outside of column definitions.  Not sure the perfect path here.

Author: Discussed in Apr 13 Maintainers.  No pushback.

> * **Location:** Normative keywords MUST NOT appear outside of the "Requirements" header. They MAY appear in non-normative sections only if explicitly enclosed in quotation marks in reference to an existing statement.

Author: Gemini says:

> This rule is great for catching rogue normative statements, but we need to ensure the AI doesn't flag standard English usage (e.g., "A practitioner may use this"). 
> 
> Here is a condensed version to save tokens while restricting the check strictly to capitalized BCP-14 keywords:
> 

```suggestion
* **Location:** Capitalized BCP-14 keywords MUST NOT appear outside "Requirements" unless quoted. Do not flag lowercase usage (e.g., "may", "should").

* **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same normative requirement.
* **Column values:** Enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Usage"`, `"Tax"`).
* **Glossary terms:** Link with `[*term*](#glossary:term)` format.

> * **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per section. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.

Author: Gemini keeps getting mad when we have examples like `[column requirements](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibilitydetails)`, where we're explicitly linking subsequently.

Let's decide whether we want an exception for that, or if we want to force authors to be explicit in their column name references.

Reviewer 2: Why not remove the subsequent links? Is there a reason to keep them? I'm fine either way, but if we want only one, we should just be explicit.

Author: Go have a look at lines 5 through 11 [here](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/2025/files#diff-3ecd6edb8366d9db7e71a0ffa1b11df79f92b16951b4d9310ced27a60998ebd2).  One example:

> Per the [column requirements](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibilitydetails)...

I get why @Matt-Cowsert laid it out this way: it reads better than:

> Per Commitment Program Eligibility Details...

But it's breaking the rule.  So either we need to allow an exception in that case, or we need to enforce the existing rule and not allow it.

@flanakin What do you think in this particular example? I could go either way.  But I put it in here to provoke discussion.

Author: Discussed in Apr 13 Maintainers.  We will keep the exception.

> * **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per section. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.

Reviewer 2: My only note here is that "section" is ambiguous. Most of the time, "section" means an H2/3/4. I think we mean "file". I thought this was surfaced before. Maybe there's a reason we didn't do that.
```suggestion
* **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per file. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.
```

Author: Yes -- agree that "section" is ill-defined.  We actually have a separate action item for consistency review to address that:

* https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/2128

My mental model has been: one occurrence per H2 header (e.g., intro, Requirements, Examples).

If we want to make it file, I could potentially get onboard with that.  But I'd like the AGENTS.md to not stray away from the Editorial Guidelines, which @jpradocueva is addressing per #2111.  AGENTS.md should remain the executive summary of the rules, and not be the tail wagging the dog.

Author: Discussed in Apr 13 Maintainers.  Will go with file per @flanakin recommendation.

* **Lists:** All unordered lists MUST use asterisks (`*`), never dashes (`-`) or plus signs (`+`). Nested bullet points MUST use exactly two spaces per level.
* **Notes:** Important notes must use the blockquote format (`> Important Consideration`).

> * **Anchors:** Pandoc auto-generates custom heading anchors. DO NOT flag missing HTML `<a name="">` tags.

Reviewer 2: Rather than "DO NOT flag", should we educate AI on link validity? Alternatively -- and possibly better -- migtht be to simply tell AI to leverage an automated test to validate anchors rather than figuring it out itself. Although both are also good, since not everyone will use Python. (I don't have it on my personal laptop.)

Author: I'm good with whatever.  I just want Gemini to stop complaining about missing anchors that will be handled later.

Author: Per discussion in Apr 13 Maintainers, I have created AI #2239 for automatically validating anchor links during the build phase.  The group was fine with the above rule in the meantime.

* **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same normative requirement.
* **Column values:** Enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Usage"`, `"Tax"`).
* **Glossary terms:** Link with `[*term*](#glossary:term)` format.

> * **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per file. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.

Author: Understood.  We accept that we need to update the guidelines, which we will do as part of AI #2128.  Resolving with no action.

> * **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per file. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.

Author: Gemini says:

* **Ambiguity in the "per file" linking rule:** Because your architecture uses `markdown-pp` to assemble smaller `.md` files into a larger `.mdpp` template, "per file" can be highly contextual. If the AI is reviewing a PR that touches a single `column.md` file, it will enforce the rule there. If it reviews the assembled `spec.md`, the rule changes entirely. You may want to explicitly state **"per source file"** to prevent the AI from applying the rule inconsistently depending on what it is looking at.

```suggestion
* **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per source file. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.
```

### File Organization

* Each section has a `.mdpp` template that includes individual `.md` files
* All `.md` files in a directory must be included in the corresponding `.mdpp`
* Code blocks must be aligned to start of line (not indented)

### Review Conduct

* **Suggestion-first feedback:** When a concrete fix exists, post it as a GitHub `suggestion` block so the author can accept with one click. Use plain-text comments only when the feedback requires discussion rather than a specific replacement.
* **Self-contained comments:** Every review comment or suggestion MUST include all context needed for the author to evaluate it independently. Do not reference other comments (e.g., "same as above" or "see my comment on line X").
* **Diff-scope discipline:** Only flag issues on lines changed or added by the PR. Pre-existing problems are out of scope unless they create a direct inconsistency with new content in the same PR.

> * **Deduplication and attribution:** Before posting feedback, review existing comments from other reviewers. Do not re-raise an issue another reviewer has already flagged. Do not post a competing suggestion on lines where another reviewer has a pending suggestion, as this undermines their attribution when the author accepts. If you have additional substance to add, reply in the existing thread rather than starting a new one.

Author: Gemini says:

> This deduplication rule is a fantastic idea to reduce PR noise, but we need to be careful about the technical limitations of our AI tooling. 
> 
> Depending on which bot we are using (e.g., CodeRabbit, Copilot Workspace, Sweep), it might only be fed the raw diff and the codebase via webhook, without any API access to the PR's actual comment threads. If we give the AI a strict instruction to read something it literally cannot see, it is highly likely to hallucinate or silently fail.
> 
> I suggest adding a conditional clause so the bot only attempts this if it actually has the context to do so.

I also wordsmithed it way down to cut down on token usage (AIs don't need to know the why).

```suggestion
* **Deduplication:** If your tooling can read PR threads, do not flag already-raised issues or post competing suggestions. To add details, reply to the existing thread.
```

* **No Mixing:** Do not mix Entity IDs and Display Names within the same normative requirement.
* **Column values:** Enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Usage"`, `"Tax"`).
* **Glossary terms:** Link with `[*term*](#glossary:term)` format.
* **Linking Rule:** Link entity names and Glossary terms ONLY on their first occurrence per source file. Exception: Functional links using different anchor text are exempt.
* **Lists:** All unordered lists MUST use asterisks (`*`), never dashes (`-`) or plus signs (`+`). Nested bullet points MUST use exactly two spaces per level.
* **Notes:** Important notes must use the blockquote format (`> Important Consideration`).
* **Anchors:** Pandoc auto-generates custom heading anchors. DO NOT flag missing HTML `<a name="">` tags.

### Validation & Schema Accuracy

* **Mathematical & Schema Accuracy:** AI reviewers MUST rigorously calculate, parse, and verify all data within examples (especially JSON snippets and tables). Flag any mathematical inconsistencies or hallucinated data.
* **JSON Formatting:** JSON blocks MUST use double quotation marks for keys. Verify that the JSON is structurally valid.

> * **Example Disclaimer:** Top-level sections with examples MUST begin with this exact note (skip all subsections): `> Note: The following examples are informative and non-normative. They do not define requirements.`

Reviewer 3: Where exactly do we expect this disclaimer? What are considered “top-level sections with examples”?

At the moment, I can find it in the following two files under `/specification`:

- `specification/appendix/commitment_program_eligibility_details_examples.md`
- `specification/supported_features/commitment_program_eligibility_details.md`

@Matt-Cowsert, this is probably a question for you 😄

Author: Top-level sections with examples would be sections like Appendix and Supported Features, which @jpradocueva added recently in 1.4.  It's not meant to be in every subsection -- that's precisely what we're trying to avoid.  Do you have a suggestion on what it should be instead?

Author: Closing with no action.

Reviewer 3: I wasn't sure if this refers to what Joaquin recently added (see below).

```markdown
2 results - 2 files

appendix\appendix_overview.md:
  2  
  3: *This section is informative. It illustrates the application of normative rules defined elsewhere in this specification and does not introduce additional requirements.*
  4  

appendix\examples\examples_overview.md:
  2  
  3: *This section is informative. It illustrates the application of normative rules defined elsewhere in this specification and does not introduce additional requirements.*
```

My suggestion: No action in this PR. We can address this later

Reviewer 4: Synced offline with Shawn and Irena. No changes needed here. The current wording maps clearly in practice to the existing top-level sections (Appendix, Supported Features). FR #2128 will formalize section terminology more broadly.

* **Self-contained comments:** Every review comment or suggestion MUST include all context needed for the author to evaluate it independently. Do not reference other comments (e.g., "same as above" or "see my comment on line X").
* **Diff-scope discipline:** Only flag issues on lines changed or added by the PR. Pre-existing problems are out of scope unless they create a direct inconsistency with new content in the same PR.
* **Deduplication:** If your tooling can read PR threads, do not flag already-raised issues or post competing suggestions. To add details, reply to the existing thread.

### Issue and Pull Request Templates

GitHub does not auto-apply templates when issues or PRs are created via API. AI agents MUST include the required template content in the body.

#### Pull Requests

Every PR body MUST follow the template at `.github/pull_request_template.md`, including:

* A summary of the changes
* The appropriate "Type of Change" checkbox

> * All "Author Checklist" items checked, including the [AI Usage Guidelines](guidelines/contributors/ai-usage-guidelines.md) attestation

Author: Let's tighten token usage with the following.

```suggestion
PR bodies MUST complete `.github/pull_request_template.md`, including the summary, "Type of Change", and "Author Checklist" (with [AI Usage Guidelines](guidelines/contributors/ai-usage-guidelines.md) attestation).
```

#### Issues

Issue templates are `.yml` form definitions in `.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/`. Use the correct title prefix and include all required fields. AGENTS.md requirements take precedence over `required` flags in the `.yml` files.

| Type | Title Prefix | Template | Required Fields |
|---|---|---|---|
| Action Item | `[AI] ` | `action-item.yml` | Definition of Done |

> | Feature Request | `[FR]: ` | `feature-request.yml` | All sections: Problem Statement, Success Criteria, Type of Request, Organizations Requesting This Feature, **and** Maintainer Assessment (Adoption Impact, Adoption Impact Justification, Supported Features Alignment, MVP Definition, North Star Vision, Phasing Strategy, Impacted Parties, Level of Ambiguity, FinOps Scope Alignment) |

Author: @Matt-Cowsert Is listing every section in the template truly necessary?  This is the style guide for _all_ LLM usage... That's a lot of token usage.

Reviewer 4: Chatted with Shawn offline. Agreed to drop the Required Fields column entirely and let agents read the yml for required fields. Edit pushed in d657f03.

* **Linking Rule:** First mention of Column/Attribute names and Glossary terms should link to their definition section. They MUST ONLY be hyperlinked the *first occurrence* per section.
* **Lists:** All unordered lists MUST use asterisks (`*`), never dashes (`-`) or plus signs (`+`). Nested bullet points MUST use exactly two spaces per level.
* **Notes:** Important notes must use the blockquote format (`> Important Consideration`).
* **Anchors:** Pandoc auto-generates custom heading anchors. DO NOT flag missing HTML `<a name="">` tags.

### Validation & Schema Accuracy

* **Mathematical & Schema Accuracy:** AI reviewers MUST rigorously calculate, parse, and verify all data within examples (especially JSON snippets and tables). Flag any mathematical inconsistencies or hallucinated data.
* **JSON Formatting:** JSON blocks MUST use double quotation marks for keys. Verify that the JSON is structurally valid.

> * **Example Disclaimer:** The exact warning note (`> Note: The following examples are informative and non-normative. They do not define requirements.`) MUST be included at the top of main specification sections that contain examples. Do not enforce this disclaimer on individual subsections or column definition files.

Author: Gemini keeps thinking we need to add this message to EVERY subsection.... 🫠

Reviewer 2: Same comment about "section" ambiguity. Other than that, I'm okay with this. It does feel a little token-heavy, but there's a ton of optimization potential throughout the whole file, so nothing unique here.

Author: I'm cool with cutting it down further.  Clearly we need to align on what "section" and "subsection" is per #2128.

Author: Discussed in Apr 13 Maintainers.  Will keep exception.

Author: Here is a stab at reducing token use to convey the same message:

```suggestion
* **Example Disclaimer:** Main sections with examples MUST begin with this exact note (skip all subsections): `> Note: The following examples are informative and non-normative. They do not define requirements.`
```

Author: Gemini says:

"Main specification sections" might be too subjective for an LLM to parse reliably. It could struggle to differentiate between the start of an appendix (`## 7. Appendix`) and a specific example subsection (`### 7.1. Examples`). 

I recommend explicitly defining the heading level to remove any ambiguity for the AI agents. 

```suggestion
* **Example Disclaimer:** Top-level sections with examples MUST begin with this exact note (skip all subsections): `> Note: The following examples are informative and non-normative. They do not define requirements.`
```

#### Issues

Issue templates are `.yml` form definitions in `.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/`. Use the correct title prefix and fill all fields marked required in the template.

| Type | Title Prefix | Template |
|---|---|---|
| Action Item | `[AI] ` | `action-item.yml` |
| Feature Request | `[FR]: ` | `feature-request.yml` |
| Feedback | `[Feedback] ` | `feedback.yml` |

> | Maintenance | `[MAINTENANCE]: ` | `maintenance.yml` |

Author: @Matt-Cowsert Please strike the colons for consistency (and take note that I've suggested you strike the colon from #2150 via [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/2150/changes#r3090277057)).  And let's proper case Maintenance (we can go back and fix the template later).

```suggestion
| Feature Request | `[FR] ` | `feature-request.yml` |
| Feedback | `[Feedback] ` | `feedback.yml` |
| Maintenance | `[Maintenance] ` | `maintenance.yml` |
```
